---
title: 'Generalised Additive Models'
date: 2024-06-07
permalink: /posts/2024/07/GAMS/
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
toc: true
tags:
  - statistics
  - non-linearity
  - GAMS
---

Generalized Additive Models (GAMs) are a powerful tool for modeling relationships in data, building on the foundation of Generalized Linear Models (GLMs). While GLMs assume linear relationships between the predictor variables and the response variable, GAMs offer more flexibility.

The core difference between GLMs and GAMs lies in how they handle the predictor variables. In a GLM, the effect of each predictor is modeled by a straight line:

$$
  y = \beta_0 + \beta_1x_1 + \beta_2x2 + \dots + \beta_px_p + \epsilon
$$

In this formulation, $\beta_0$ is the intercept, $\beta_j$ are the coefficients for each predictor $x_j$, and $\epsilon$ represents the error term. GAMs, however, replace these straight lines $\beta_jx_j$ with smooth functions $f_j(x_j)$. These functions can capture more complex, non-linear patterns that might exist in real-world data.

## The GAM formula

Typically a GAM can be written as:

$$
  g(\mu) = \alpha + f_1(x_1) + f_2(x_2) + \dots + f_p(x_p)
$$

where:

- $g$ is a link function
- $\mu$ is the expected value of the response variable $Y$
- $\alpha$ is the intercept term
- $f_1 \dots f_p$ are smooth functions of the predictor variables $x_1 \dots x_p$

By summing these smooth functions, GAMs create a more flexible model that can adapt to complex data patterns.

## Link Function

The link function $g$ connects the linear predictor to the mean of the response variable and allows GAMs to accommodate different types of response distributions:

- **Identity link**: Used for a normally distributed continous response variable $(g(\mu) = E(\mu))$
- **Logit link**: Used for binary response data $(g(\mu) = log(\frac{\mu}{1-\mu}))$
- **log link**: Used for count data $(g(\mu) = log(\mu))$

## Smooth Functions

The smooth functions $f_j(x_j)$ in GAMs are typically non-parametric, allowing them to capture complex, non-linear relationships without requiring a specific functional form. Commonly used smooth functions include:

- **Splines**: Functions defined piecewise by polynomial functions which are joined at certain points called knots.
    - **Cubic Splines**: Provide smooth curves that are twice continuously differentiable
    - **B-splines**: Basis splines that provide a flexible way of fitting a smooth curve
    - **Thin Plate Splines**: A type of spline with no pre-specified knots, useful for multidimensional smooth functions